good evening from Downing Street where
I'm joined by Steve Paulus medical
director of the NHS and Yvonne Doyle
medical director at public health
England earlier today the government's
independent fiscal watchdog the office
for Budget Responsibility the OPR
published a report into the impact of
corona virus on the economy and public
finances it is important to be clear
that the OB ours numbers are not a
forecast or a prediction
they simply set out what one possible
scenario might look like and it may not
even be the most likely scenario but
it's important that we are honest with
people about what might be happening in
our economy so before I turn to today's
health figures I want to spend a few
minutes explaining what the obr have
said and let me thank them for their
continued work there are three brief
points I wanted to make first the obra
Gers suggests that the scale of what we
are facing will have serious
implications for our economy here at
home in common with other countries
around the world these are tough times
and there will be more to come as I've
said before we can't protect every
business and every household but we came
into this crisis with a fundamentally
sound economy powered by the hard work
and ingenuity of the British people and
British businesses so while those
economic impacts are significant the obr
also expect them to be temporary where
they bounce back in growth the second
point I want to make is that we're not
just going to stand by and let this
happen our planned economic response
it's protecting millions of jobs
businesses self-employed people
charities and households our response
aims to directly support people and
businesses while the restrictions are in
place and to make sure that as the
restrictions are changed we
can as quickly as possible get people
back to work get businesses moving again
and recover our economy the obr today
have been clear that the policies we
have set out will do that
the OVR today have been clear that if we
had not taken the actions we have the
situation would be much worse in other
words our plan is the right plan the
third point I want to make is this right
now the single most important thing we
can do for the health of our economy is
to protect the health of our people it's
not a case of choosing between the
economy and public health common sense
tells us that doing so would be
self-defeating
at a time and we are seeing hundreds of
people dying every day from this
terrible disease the absolute priority
must be to focus all of our resources
not just of the state but of businesses
and all of you at home as well in a
collective national effort to beat this
virus the government's approach is to
follow scientific and medical advice
through our step-by-step action plan
aiming to slow the spread of the virus
so fewer people need hospital treatment
at any one time protecting the NHS's
ability to cope I said in my budget a
month ago
that whatever the NHS needs it will get
and we have honored that promise
yesterday we published an update showing
that we've given our public services an
extra 14 and a half billion pounds in
recent weeks we are taking action to
increase NHS capacity with more beds
more key staff and more equipment on the
frontline and the Secretary of State for
Health and Social Care will be updating
on our plans for Social Care tomorrow
this is why we are instructing people to
stay at home so that we can protect our
NHS and save lives
I can report that through the
government's ongoing monitoring and
testing program as of today three
hundred and two thousand five hundred
and ninety nine people in the UK have
now been tested for coronavirus with
ninety three thousand eight hundred and
seventy three people testing positive
nineteen thousand seven hundred and six
people in the UK have been admitted to
hospital with the virus down from twenty
thousand one hundred and eighty four
people yesterday sadly of those in
hospital twelve thousand one hundred and
seven people have now died an increase
of seven hundred and seventy-eight
fatalities since yesterday our thoughts
are with the family and friends of all
those who have lost their lives
these figures are a powerful reminder to
us all of the importance of following
the government's guidance stay at home
protect our NHS and save lives
thank you I'll now hand over to Steve to
take you through today's data in more
detail before we take some questions
from the media thank you well as you've
just heard our main strategy in
combating this virus is social
distancing so in other words stay at
home avoid social contact and by doing
that we can ensure that the spread of
the virus the transmission from one
person to another is reduced so over
time we will start to see a reduction in
the number of infections from
coronavirus and I'm pleased to say that
we continue to see evidence that the
great British public are complying with
those instructions you've seen this
transport chart most days and you can
see that we continue to see much reduced
activity in public transport but also in
vehicle transport and there are other
data that we look at on a regular basis
that tell us that compliance levels in
the public are very high and and we need
to keep it that way we absolutely need
to make make sure that we keep the
benefits of this going forward
and we don't take a foot off the pedal
we don't become complacent now of course
a reduction in infection rates in the
next slide will then translate into a
reduction in you UK cases and you can
see here our testing has shown a
plateauing of the number of new cases
we're picking up we're not testing
everybody who's symptomatic in the
community so this data will never be a
true complete reflection but I think in
the next slide you can see that that in
turn will then translate into an effect
on the number of people who require a
hospital bed now as we've often said for
the vast majority of individuals this is
a mild illness like flu-like illness or
a bad cold but for an unfortunate
minority this will require
hospitalization but you can see that
there's increasing evidence now that the
number of hospital admissions is
stabilizing and plateauing you can see
that in London but you can also see it
in other areas such as the Midlands and
this is evidence that is now
accumulating that the benefit of that
social distancing of reducing
transmission is now beginning to be
manifest in in a stabilisation in
hospital admissions and then on the next
slide you will see the number of deaths
in the UK and as you've heard that is
continuing to rise this is the number
that will reduce last unfortunately with
sadness it's the one that will take
longest to change but those benefits
from social distancing will eventually
translate into a reduction in the number
of daily deaths so the message is quite
clear we are beginning to see the
benefits of the undoubted hardship that
we've all been asked to to go through in
terms of social distancing in terms of
not meeting with friends and family it's
really important that those benefits are
maintained that we continue to follow
the instructions that we've all been
given
and we will then get on top of this
virus thank you Steve
if we could turn to some questions think
first Laura Coons Berg from the BBC and
Thank You Chancellor people are of
course devastated by the numbers of
people losing their lives but tonight
with warnings of two million extra
people unemployed people are also
desperately worried about their jobs if
you can level with people do you think
you will be filling the costs of this
crisis for a generation and if I could
ask the medics can you from as soon as
you possibly can start including the
numbers of deaths and care homes and in
the community in these daily statistics
so people can have a true picture of
what's going on Thank You Laura
I also when I see these numbers and
deeply troubled and as I've I think
consistently said well I've been at this
podium and elsewhere you know this is
going to be hard it you know our economy
is going to take a significant hit and
as I've said before that's not an
abstract thing people are going to feel
that in their jobs and in their
household incomes you know what I would
say and what the obr report I think
confirms is that you know the measures
we've put in place can significantly
mitigate that impact in particular the
jobs retention scheme the furloughing
scheme we've put in place aims to do
exactly that
ensure that fewer people are unemployed
but remain attached to their company
through the furlough scheme and then
also as EOBR says the reason that's a
good thing not just in the short term
which means when we get through this we
can bounce back as quickly as possible
so to your point about a generation know
I very much hope that the measures we've
put in place will allow us to do in
exactly as EOBRs said bounce back and if
you look at their scenario that is
something that they talked about in
there so you know yes it will be
difficult in the short term I'm happy to
be honest about that people I think the
measures we've put in place will help
and then as we get through this it will
mean that we can you know recover
quickly and strongly and get our lives
and economy back to normal and I think
if on all Steve on that probably have on
on on the data Thank You Chancellor
Thank You Laura
yes so and the deaths in out of hospital
we the Office of National Statistics do
actually collect total deaths and we've
had a
load of that today but Laura we are
working with ons to actually speed that
up so that we do get quicker information
as you know the daily deaths we would
very much like to have it's a bit more
complicated for care homes and because
although over nine out of ten deaths
sadly do occur still in hospital in the
community there's a range of places
where they occur including in care homes
but not just there in hospices and at
home indeed as well and in these very
dispersed systems we just need to be
absolutely clear that the cause of death
that is attributed is correct and that
is what takes time on the death
certificate to get right but we would
like to have much more rapid data
preferably on a daily basis and that's
what we're working towards does that
cover it Nora can I just come back in on
on your point I mean the numbers you you
hope there will be a temporary
bounce-back but the expansion of the
amount of borrowing that the government
is going to do in the projection so the
deficit do suggest that there will be
very long-term consequences for either
your government or future government's
choices do you really think that we
could just shake this off within a few
months from the economy well I think
there's two separate things you know one
is what happens in the real economy in
terms of business activity economic
growth and jobs and there I you know I
do hope the measures we've put in place
will ensure that we can have a
reasonably fast bounce-back that's why
we're doing what we can obviously that's
a function of when we exit all of these
measures but I think your second point
about public finances this year you know
the OPR is right to say you know there
will be a significant increase in
borrowing that you know we are we are
borrowing a significant amount in order
to fund these measures I think that's
absolutely the right decision and as the
OVR have said I think the cost of not
doing that would be far worse than if we
did do what we're doing so I think that
is the right thing to say and then you
know as we think about our future public
finances you know if we get as the OPR
has put in its scenario a relatively
swift bounce back in the economy
recovery actually our public finances on
a year-to-year basis should return to a
more normal position the interventions
we've put in place are largely temporary
and and do not need to be repeated on a
year-by-year basis so hopefully that
will allow us to get to a sustainable
position you know
soon after we exit thank thank you I
think the next question is Paul brand at
the ITV Paul you they're brilliant hi
yeah
good afternoon I just want to pick up on
Laura's point about data and put that to
you as well Chancellor we've been
filming today in a care home in
Gateshead where they feel as if the
residents they've lost a Kovac 19 are
being forgotten given that data does
exist however imperfect it may be
wouldn't it just be more respectful to
include those deaths in your own
statistics will it pull up before
everyone talks about the data what I
tell you from my perspective is that
they've say to all those people working
in care homes up and down the country
you know whether it's the people in them
whether it's the people looking after
them you've absolutely not been
forgotten and there's an enormous amount
of focus whether it's at the NHS whether
it's at public health England or
elsewhere to make sure that care homes
not just get the PPE they need that they
get the testing they need they get the
support they need in every aspect of the
job they're doing which is extraordinary
and you know when we clap every week
we're clapping for people everywhere who
are caring in terms of the data and
there's absolutely no desire not to
respect what's happening in care homes
and to provide that data and as Yvonne
talked about in a second we're actually
working with the ONS to speed up the
publication of that data in terms of the
data that we publish every day and make
decisions on I think there there is a
question about making sure we have a
data set that is you know consistent and
accurate and timely and I think there is
there's just there a logistical
challenge in being able to collect that
data and then make decisions based on it
but Yvonne can maybe elaborate on that
point Thank You Chancellor so absolutely
I mean I would very much like to have
the best possible data on a daily basis
and the care sector is very much seen as
part of the health and care of family
they are the front line and we're very
familiar with that sector through our
local work and through our national work
with local government and with the local
response forums the local resilience
forum so we we work on the outbreaks
which is even more important to discuss
in a sense than anything else at the
moment where we have a number of
outbreaks in care homes and there is
very active input there to ensure that
the damage and the harm to
is mitigated so we work very actively
with the care home sector but it is a
very dispersed sector the reason that we
can provide the data very quickly from
hospitals is because there are fewer
hospitals compared to care and so we're
working with a smaller number of
organisations but because our hospitals
are very used to the process of
supplying data to NHS England on a
regular and even on a daily basis that
is something that they do during normal
times for all sorts of data so we in the
hospital sector have a have an
infrastructure and a basis to get that
data rapidly and of course the patients
that we report from hospitals are those
that we know have been tested as
positive and again that is different
from in the community where doctors are
registering debts based on probable
diagnosis and not necessarily on a
tested diagnosis so there are key
differences in the two sets of data and
how they are collected yet and Paul just
put some context around Steve's point
that there are a couple of hundred NHS
trusts with an existing consistent
system for providing data there are tens
of thousands of social care settings
that one is to collect data from and
that that's the the challenge that Steve
is talking about but does that answer
your question fully yeah can I just pick
up on on the data again though because
there has been some discussion the past
couple of days that your own slides
include data from France which does
include in France they do include data
in care homes in their data so why would
it be fair to put that data on your
slide but not care homes s in the UK on
that slide so indeed at different
countries report in different ways and
one of the issues that we've noticed is
sometimes the way those data are
presented can cause quite a surprise in
the system so recently there was quite a
large inject of data from care homes in
France
it made the data look as if there was an
alarming increase in deaths on that day
it wasn't actually the case and it it
demonstrates exactly the challenge of
getting this right day on day
and we're very much learning
internationally we're in touch with all
our European neighbors to learn the best
we can do and I think that the general
point is that it's really important that
we compare with other countries that all
countries compare with each other and
learn from each other but of course
there are differences in the reporting
of all sorts of statistics from
different countries and it's really
important to ensure that that is taken
into account when you are doing that
comparison thank thank you Paul if we
could turn next to Catherine Sampson at
STV Thank You Chancellor
Scotland's First Minister Nicola
Sturgeon stares at her press conference
this afternoon she wants assurances that
Scottish care workers aren't going to
lose out on PPE because of reports
companies have been told to prioritize
NHS England could you please confirm for
me no company has been told to do this
by public health England will you be
investigating this further basically
it's this story rubbish or is it not
thank you for the question Katherine I
mean I I think if you look at what the
National Clinical Director in Scotland
said I think earlier today I mean he
said we've looked into it and we do
think it's rubbish those were his words
not not mine I would say from our
perspective there's been incredibly
close coordinated action across our
public health bodies and NHS bodies to
make sure we have a four-nation approach
to all of this there's no truth in those
stories that those companies have been
told to prioritize PPE equipment and I
think rather the contrary is actually
happening in fact as Steve and Yvonne
will elaborate on a minute there's been
incredibly close collaboration between
our four nations in this in this regard
but if only you best place to give some
examples of that
thank you John so I can assure you that
the four chief medical officers and the
four medical directors the nursing
directors work very closely on if not a
daily certainly a weekly in with that
group and we are very coordinated on
what we want and we want to make sure
that each country gets what it needs and
that is driven by the intelligence that
we get back from each of the devolved
administration's so public health
England has no
in any sense directors any of the
devolved administration's to be at any
disadvantage we work really closely
together Thank You Katherine could we
turn next to Edie Conway from Sky yeah
thanks Chancellor and there's been quite
a lot of talk about how unprecedented
the economic impact of Cobie 19 has been
but the scenario that we've heard about
from the OPR as you say it is pretty
shocking you know it's the deepest slump
since 1709 two million people unemployed
the states that it's bigger size ever
the national debt er 100% of GDP
did did all of that shock you and even
if the economy does bounce back you will
still have higher debt it will be a
bigger state so are you really
suggesting that life will simply return
to normal what ed what you know I'd echo
what I've said before and you've given
some some numbers there but I generally
don't believe this is a time for
ideology or orthodoxy this is an
unprecedented times an unprecedented
crisis and that calls for an
unprecedented economic response so in
that sense you know it's not surprising
to see some of these figures because
what we're dealing with here is unlike
anything we've seen before which is why
we've put in place the measures we have
and I do believe that those measures
will help mitigate some of the
short-term impact on our economy and
ensure that we can try and keep as much
of the productive capacity of our
economy as many businesses connected to
their employees as possible during this
difficult period so that when it's over
and it will be over at some point then
they can reconnect and we can bounce
back as an economy as quickly as
possible and indeed that's what the obr
scenario you know puts in its puts in
its full cast so you know I do believe
that is possible in that sense when you
talk about getting back to normal but I
sense you might have a follow-up on that
so please please do ask well I'm curious
just because you know you talked a lot
about hardship and I'm curious you know
we're getting some idea about what
hardship means for many people in
Britain for many companies but I'm also
wondering whether the hardship might
have to continue after this if we have
such a high
level of debt that the UK economy is
going to look slightly different than it
was only a few months ago well once we
get through this obviously we'll have to
take stock of public finances in the
economy and make the right decisions at
that point and I've talked before about
when doing whatever we need to to right
the ship
at that point but what I would say is
that we remain very committed to the
agenda that we set out before which was
about leveling up and spreading
opportunity around this country and
indeed I believe that can still be a
critical part of how we get back to
normal here right it you know we are all
in this together as we face this public
health crisis it's a collective national
effort and when we think about our
economic recovery I think about it as
one in which we're all in together as
well and one where every single part of
this country is able to share in the
benefits of growth and opportunity and
improvements in productivity at that
point so our agenda about spreading
opportunity to our regions about
leveling up and investing in
infrastructure that will only become I
think more important as we exit this
crisis and it's delivering on that that
will actually help right the ship
restore public finances to a sensible
place when we come out of this so you
know the OVR talks about the possibility
for that and you know our job is to
deliver on that once we get through this
I hope that's clear
is that right thank thank you ad perfect
should we move next to Francis Elliot at
the Times hi Chancellor yes just picking
up on Ed's point burr I mean it's clear
that the economic fallout from this is
going to disproportionately hit the
young I'm thinking of particularly
people joining the labor market looking
forward can you commit to maintaining
policies like the triple lock on
pensions for instance what's your
message to younger people and to the
medics if I could ask and do you have
any data on the proportion of new cases
which are hospital-acquired infections
of COBIT or acquired in care homes are
there kind of our rates that are above
one in those settings we understand that
they're below one in the community could
you possibly give us some granularity on
the data of hospital inquire infection
please
Frances thanks I mean not I mean you've
got drawing me into writing future
budgets here today which is probably
difficult thing to do but to your
general point about young people and the
role and the part they've played in this
you know I pay enormous tribute to them
and you know whether it's you know very
young children who were not able to go
to school take exams
you know it's enormous to be disruptive
to them and they're trying to operate
the best that they can and they're doing
they're doing it you know what they're
doing in difficult circumstances trying
to do the best they can and then all the
way up to serve people in the labor
market as you talked about know what you
know my message then would be you know
thank you very thing you're doing when I
see all the reports of people
volunteering young people in their
communities who have the time to help
out an elderly neighbor with shopping or
volunteering on our new NHS app and
other systems you know that to me is our
society coming together everyone
realizing they can play a different role
to help us as a country get through this
and that deserves enormous praise from
an economic perspective you know you
know whatever age you're at you know our
job is to provide opportunity if you
when we come out of this so to me it
doesn't matter whether you're you know
young middle aged or old whether you
live in London or in the countryside in
the southwest or indeed in the northeast
of England you know we want to make sure
that there's economic opportunity for
you that might mean that you want to
start your own business and so as we
come out of this you know I want to look
at making sure that this remains one of
the best places in the world to start
and grow a business it is this the best
place to go and study and research the
next generation of whether it's vaccines
or indeed anything else that our country
is so good at doing to create the next
companies of the future right so I will
look at all of those things and make
sure that the plans we had in place
before are the right ones what can we do
to turbocharge them even further because
if you're young and entering the labor
market I want you to look forward and
see opportunity and hope for your future
and I'm confident that we will be able
to deliver that as we exit this crisis
if I could say something about
hospital-acquired infections Yvonne
might want to comment too and Yvonne
might want to say something about care
home infections so so the first thing
I'd say is is we take hospital-acquired
infections very seriously we do in
normal times and we absolutely do now
but we have a very strong record in
the UK of managing hospital-acquired
infections so it's a one example that
would be mrs a blood infections when i
was a young doctor they occurred
relatively frequently and due to a huge
amount of work on that particular
hospital acquired infection it now
happens rarely so we have very strong
infection prevention and control systems
within our hospitals so we are we are in
a good place going into this epidemic
having said that clearly this is a new
virus it's one that we are still
learning about in terms of how its
transmitted in terms of its infection
rate and of course we are seeing much
more of it because it is coming in to a
population that is not immune than we
would for other infections so it's not
unexpected that we will see some
hospital acquired infections relating to
corona virus we're really looking at
that very carefully we want to ensure
that where we do see it we get on top of
it very quickly our hospitals are
separating out corona virus patients
from other patients their cohorting
they're using all the standard infection
prevention and control methods that they
use to manage infections but we do need
to make sure that we learn from this new
virus and if we need to adapt our
infection prevention and control
policies to manage it differently then
we should do that so it's something that
we are actively looking at at the moment
i can't give you that our number that
you asked for because don't know what
that is but the message is that we take
hospital-acquired infections very
seriously and we will continue to look
at this and ensure that we adapt our our
policies within hospitals to take
account at what we've learned about this
new virus and how we should manage it
you're on yes thank you Steve and
equally where we are very much a
cognizant of what is happening in care
homes and we met each day we get
information from our local teams working
with directors of Public Health and the
local resilience for about what is going
on in terms of this infection in care
homes it doesn't distinguish it will
pick the vulnerable and of course they
will not be immune either and those
those and it's situations
we call them but actually sometimes that
fatality there are outbreaks as well
local teams with
our support and guidance will be in
there providing advice doing testing and
arranging for the mitigation of harm to
those vulnerable people bear in mind
it's a very it's a very challenging
group because many of these residents
may have dementia and it's important
that it is a humane response as well so
this is a different challenge to
hospital as part of equal concern and
all that our number in hospitals when I
said I don't know what it is
let me be clear it's because the data is
not clear enough for us to get a good
sight of what it is at the moment so but
that work will be ongoing as part of
I'll look at healthcare associated
infections Francis that answer as
comprehensively as they can hopefully
well just be absolutely clear there is
so there is no number of
hospital-acquired infections so so the
data is being looked at at the moment
and I think you specifically asked about
the are number which is infection rate
and the data is not clear enough yet to
be able to give that number or to or to
calculate that number Thank You Francis
turn next to Tom Newton done at the Sun
Chancellor thank you very much question
the photo schemes loans and grants that
you're supervising there's been a lot of
complaint from sectors like the British
Chamber of Commerce and others that
although welcome it's just simply not
having happening fast enough paid a lot
of companies is coming on April 25th
after which a lot of companies simply
won't survive unless they have that
money in time so can you give a
guarantee today that your furlough money
will the portal will be open by April
the 25th and money will start to leave
the treasury to these companies by then
April the 25th and a quick question to
Ron and Steve going back to be the
France UK comparison on the the daily
mortality figures it is simply unfair to
compare them to put those figures on the
same chart is it not because effectively
you're comparing
apples with pears one with Kevin desu
one without do you accept that if you
just compared Hospital deaths between
France in the UK the UK would be above
the French line for some time that
thanks Tom
you mentioned three different schemes
and you're absolutely right to do that
and do keep pushing right because we
need to make sure that the interventions
we're putting in place reach the people
that they're designed to help in terms
of the grants to small businesses that
money has obviously left central
government and gone to local government
who administering those grant schemes I
think the last numbers I saw showed that
about a third of it had already been
dispersed to businesses that three to
four billion pounds but they're still up
see more to go I spoke to the local
government Secretary of State today
about that and he's intensifying his
efforts and scrutiny to make sure we can
get that money out the door as fast as
possible in terms of the loans
I think there's been enormous
improvement from where we were at the
end of the week before last were there
about a thousand loans that have been
issued that number is now up I think
four times to the end of last week the
amount of in terms of millions of pounds
that have gone out the door is up I
think five times the changes that we
made I think are making a difference I'm
grateful to all the bank staff who I
know many at the large banks have worked
over the Easter weekend to help work
through the backlog of applications that
they had so I thank you to all of them
for doing that which I think will mean
that we see an acceleration in those
numbers in the coming days as well but
we're keeping a careful eye on on that
as you would imagine and on in close
contact with the bank CEOs and then
lastly on the furlough scheme you know
what we what we said when I announced
this scheme was you know to reiterate
we've never had something like this in
the UK before as you've seen from the
OPR report today it potentially might
cover millions of people and we had to
build a brand new system from scratch to
handle that and that is what is
dictating the timing you know the team
have been working night and day since
the announcement to get this up and
running you know what are planning I've
always said that this scheme would be up
and running by the end of April that's
our intention I think where we are at
the moment is we are on track
to deliver that the system is built
we're in the process of testing that
with small groups of employers at the
moment it will open is the plan on the
20th of April is the working assumption
that it will open on the 20th of April
for applications and then there is a
period of several days between
submitting an application and receiving
cash that's comprised of two chunks one
is our desire and need to do some fraud
checks as you would rightly expect
because we need to make sure that the
taxpayer is protected against fraudulent
claims that takes us a little bit of
time to do and then the remainder of the
time is our is the back system in order
to get the money back to people but the
timely if portal should be open on or
around the 20th and then from there
there's a period of days several days to
get the cash but you should be able to
get the cash before the end of the month
if everything goes to plan and then
Steve did you want to pick up all with
it everyone well I can store it so and
yes I completely understand the point
about comparing like would like and
there are so many measures now even of
death which you might imagine is a
fairly straightforward measure that it
is very can be very difficult to
understand what exactly you're looking
at and one of the things we're doing all
the time is speaking to very European
neighbors to understand not just what
they're measuring but what they consider
best practice to be and how we can learn
together about that in the early stages
of this an epidemic it was clear that we
were even for death we were looking at
very different denominator populations
so even there we weren't actually able
to compare like with like because it was
a much younger population that had been
tested so it would be ideal if we were
absolutely clear we were comparing like
would like and that's how we endeavor to
do but we we are always open for
learning on that perfect Tom's that I
think covers everything right quick
quick follow-up if I mind I don't mind
the the loan guarantee scheme is
certainly also another criticism from
people who say you should be taking home
percent at the risk certainly for the
smaller companies for lanes on the to a
few thousand pounds one of your
predecessors George Osborne has said
today you should do that will you think
about doing it yeah I
you know and they people say you know I
should take 100% of the risk it's not
really me it's actually all of us right
it's the taxpayer taking a hundred
percent of the risk of the loans
defaulting and removing at that point
any credit check that the bank might do
so having said that is there an argument
for looking at something like that of
course there is their systems like that
that are in place in Switzerland and in
Germany Germany have just put a system
in place right at the end of last week
that they got approval to do so we
continually look at everything that
other countries are doing to see if
there are things we can learn and
improve from well I would say is theirs
first there's an economic and fiscal
question as to whether it would be the
right intervention for us we are also
doing a lot of direct cash support to
businesses through the grants that you
asked about and I mentioned for ten
thousand twenty five thousand pound cash
grants we've also done huge business
rates tax cuts in the tens of billions
of pounds so you know those collectively
are quite significant not every country
has replicated those direct cash help to
businesses but you know as I said we
continue to keep everything under review
and look at everything to see where
improvements might be made at the last
thing sorry to add on on that is manures
before about the furlough scheme we have
to be confident that whatever we come up
with is actually deliverable and and
some of the countries that have put
these things in place elsewhere have
historic systems that are able to
deliver them you know that is not the
case in this country we have not done
things like this before which means we
don't have the capability in the systems
to deliver something necessarily just
because you see it in another country
and I think on loans in particular
you've seen you know whether it's the US
whether it's France whether it's
actually Germany as well you know in all
their domestic press and media and
business organizations you have seen
frustration with the pace of the loan
programs because all of these countries
like us are doing things that they
haven't done before and that there's a
genuine just delivery question about
that thanks very much we turn next to
Dan O'Donoghue from the press and
journal think I just like we've been
said this afternoon there audience that
will deliver saw by more than two
million due to the current
virus crisis and given all the problems
prior to up nets and if not your open
source such as universe or basic income
and a quick one to the medics as well
in said how did you get exceed pensive
cares the past report suggests or just
nineteen patients currently at NHS
Nightingale in London at one hundred to
dine in care homes I think we will try
and get Dan back but if I can answer the
first part of his question around I'd
which I think was a down are you there
we're struggling to hear you make why
don't we try and move on and if we can
get down back we we can that fine
brilliant turning next to Emilio from
Politico I am I've got two questions one
for the Chancellor so we have an idea
today of how bad the economic kit from
the corona virus could be and the
Treasury is already committed obviously
i watering some supporting the country
through it you said you don't want to
write a budget now but can you just give
us a rough sense of how you're thinking
that we might pay for it so will that be
tax rises could that be tweaks to the
triple lock so that pensioners help pay
could there be maybe another decade of
austerity for public services can you
just give it an idea of where that you
think that money's gonna come from how
would you write the
and then one question for the medics and
you've been guided by the science in
making the decisions so far but now of
course we've got the benefit of
hindsight for at least some of this so
can maybe each one of you maybe name the
one thing that you wish we've done
differently so maybe looking down a
country earlier getting testing going
earlier joining the EU ventilator scheme
something like that is there anything at
all you wish we done differently with
the benefit of hindsight what do you
think
response has been without fault so far
thanks Emilio look I'm not I'm just not
able to talk about future tax policy
here well I would say that the economic
priority now is to make sure that we can
mitigate as much of the impact that the
health interventions are causing I think
that sums that we've committed are
worthwhile in that regard as the OVR
report talks about it would be far worse
if we weren't doing what we were doing
so I do believe that is the right
decision and in terms of when we come
out of this in terms of writing the ship
we'll have to look at it then it's you
know you're right to point out obviously
this has this has cost a lot but you
know as I said before you know the best
way out of this for all of us is to just
grow the economy which is why trying to
keep as much of it intact as possible at
this moment you know allows that bounce
back when we come out of it and allows
us to hopefully snap back to normal as
quickly as possible
you know that's clearly the most
preferable thing and if that happens it
means the long-term impact on public
finances for example well you know will
obviously be reduced then interventions
this year a temporary there quickly back
get back to normal the quicker we get
back to a sustainable set of public
finances so you know that's very much
the priority right now and then if all
you want to go first yes so and it's a
very good question and I'm sure it would
be asked many times and to me it seems
as if my colleagues and I have been
working since at least mid January seven
days a week sometimes all nice in our
labs we have learned so much that I wish
I had known in January because
undoubtedly we perhaps could have done
things differently but you know we have
just worked tirelessly month-in
month-out and it's been a privilege to
do so one of the great questions for me
is you know when when was this virus
first around and if I had known that I
think it would have been a wonderful
Public Health gift to have been able to
perhaps anticipate what it would do and
that's one of the good scientific
questions but it's not immediate that we
have nothing to learn we have so much to
learn but I can assure you we are
working so hard that every day what we
do we do in also
Sarah she for the benefit of the
population and yes of course we could do
things better and we want and that's why
we keep talking to our neighbors
actually so that we can learn that so
I'm very humble about it but there is so
much to say about this so it's a great
question and and I spent my medical
career as a doctor always looking back
on cases I've managed circumstances I've
been in asking what could we have done
better I think doctors and other
clinicians are very self-critical but
one thing I've learnt is that you can
come to those conclusions too early and
you have to wait until you've got to the
appropriate time to look back and learn
the right lessons and do the right
analysis because at the moment we are
still very much of the early stages of
this and I think the answer to your
question will likely be different when
we get towards the end of this and it
will be now and so I think it's too
early to jump to those sorts of
conclusions but I'm absolutely confident
that we will all want to look back and
say what could we have done differently
what could we have done in this way what
could we have done perhaps in another
way thank you
really if I might just add on that I
think we're all dealing whether it's you
know politicians whether it's medical
advisers doctors in we're all dealing
with something that no one's ever really
faced before and we're not alone in that
every country around the world is in the
same situation so when you're faced with
such an unprecedented challenge you know
of course we're going to be absolutely
perfect on every single thing we do at
the pace we're having to do it no of
course of course not right but what
you've heard and I would echo from our
end is you know constantly being driven
to do what we think is in the best
interest of the country and people and
keeping them safe and where we can learn
adjust or iterate you know whether it's
on what I'm doing on economic
interventions and loan schemes and
whether it's on what Yvonne and Steve
were responsible for you know constantly
being open to hearing what can be
improved what can be better responding
to feedback and changing things where we
need to is absolutely the approach I
think all of us collectively take as we
as we try and get the country and the
economy through this thanks very much
and I think we might have gone back
oh yeah I'll try again and no Chancellor
as has already been said suffer noon
unemployment could soar by more than 3
million G's the coronavirus crisis given
all the problems prior to the outbreak
with universal credits is you see really
an adequate safety nets and if not are
you open to proposals such as universal
basic income and I could also just ask
quickly to the medics and it keeps me
insert how the UK won't exceed intensive
care capacity a report suggests there
are just 19 patients NHS Nightingale in
London for hundreds of daga care homes
and a home why aren't they being taken
into hospital if there's room for them
dan thanks for your question no I don't
I don't think universal basic income is
the right response to this I think
Universal Credit is is working well and
obviously your DWP staffer under strain
like many other organizations across the
country because they're dealing with
people being sick in a way as well but I
think given the circumstances you know
they are processing claims efficiently
and effectively we've provided some
extra resource to DWP to help them with
that but I think that their staff do
deserve praise for what they're doing
we've also injected extra resources to
deal with the particular nature of this
crisis into the welfare system you know
whether that's strengthening Universal
Credit temporarily for this year working
tax credits or indeed local housing
allowance their local council tax
appalled all of those interventions
which will total several billion pounds
because of the unprecedented nature of
what we're facing it you know will go to
supporting the most vulnerable people in
our country and I do believe all of
those things are getting to the people
that they need to Yvonne did you want to
just a quick comment I think it's really
this is a really important question
because it brings forward the answer
that nobody who needs the NHS care in
in an emergency should be denied that
and I think that's the message that
Steve would want to convey as well the
NHS is there for people what we do need
to understand is the death the much more
analysis and understanding of the deaths
as they occur and that is being done
regularly so there may be very good
reasons why people from care homes are
not being admitted to hospital I can't
answer that here but what I do want to
make clear is that at no time has it
been said to me anywhere that the NHS
would not accept a patient who needed to
be admitted yes I think that's
absolutely right in normal times when
we're not dealing with a global pandemic
doctors and other clinicians make
difficult decisions with families and
patients on a daily basis as to who
might get admitted to hospital when
there's a serious illness perhaps
somebody in a care home who might be
admitted to ITU in terms of the benefit
of ITU treatment so those decisions and
discussions are made and had day-in
day-out in the NHS and it should be the
exactly the same now so the whole of one
of the purposes of ensuring that the NHS
capacity always stays ahead not just in
the ITU beds but actually in the general
beds on the ward as well as being to
allow clinicians to continue to have
those discussions and make those
decisions in in the way that they always
do make those decisions and the chief
nursing officer myself have been very
clear and in fact we have written on on
do not resuscitate orders that we should
be dealing with that as a clinical body
exactly the same way as we always have
done and the fact that we have got the
additional capacity in ER we plan so
well to get that additional capacity it
should mean that clinicians should be
confident that they can have those
discussions as they always have done in
the current epidemic
thank you Dan I think we had one follow
up that I may have missed so apologies I
am Emilio hi I am sorry I put them up
you me I mean just what I click on that
economic impact is a bit really key
followed but obviously one thing that
could make the economic
situation worth is in No Deal brexit so
why is the government willing to put the
country through that awkward what is
hardly any gonna be suffering through
coronavirus i thanks Amelia I mean you
talk about No Deal I mean the reality is
we've left the European Union and we've
left it with a deal that was negotiated
you know with regard to our future
relationship obviously that's something
that currently those talks are under
underway we remain very committed to the
timeline that we've set out to conclude
those by the end of this year what I can
say is you know David Frost our chief EU
negotiator on behalf the Prime Minister
was in touch with his deputy counterpart
last week and with Michel Barnier his
direct counterpart this week to make
sure that we have a timeline in place
for this phase of the negotiations which
obviously can happen over video
conferences and texts and legal
agreements are being exchanged between
the EU and ourselves so on you know I'm
confident that that work can continue
and hopefully reach a satisfactory
conclusion but we remain committed to
the timeline that we've set out thank
you Emilio and I think that brings
brings today's press conference to a
conclusion Thank You Yvonne thank you
Steve and to everyone at home thank you
for complying with the social distancing
guidelines and rules over what was a
very sunny bank holiday weekend I know
it's difficult for all of us in our
different ways to get through this but
we are getting through it we're getting
through it together
and we can look forward to happier times
but in the meantime please do stay at
home protect the NHS and save lives
thank you
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch BBC News live in the app and get
the full story with BBC dovecote UK
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with BBC News